This is a kind of Punjab which we know
[music]
but lately we are getting acquainted with another Punjab,
you know
what is the tragedy of our Punjab, this mud pav tattoo of ours
reminds me of this dialogue of Parveer Singh
on Punjab.  An
economic crisis does not want to be accepted.
Who is responsible for this bad condition of Punjab
that the governments of Punjab are
living in their own dreams instead of
putting the Punjabi economy on its feet?
What crisis am I talking about in Punjab?
Today's situation of Punjab's financial crisis is
that Punjab is repaying its debt by taking loan.
Financial crisis is deepening in Punjab. Employees did
not get salary. Let me accept one thing that there
is a crisis and our
treasure which is our health is getting better.
But it does not seem that the debt on the government is
four times the revenue that Punjab earned last year. By the
time the
next government comes to power in Punjab, the
debt of the state is likely to reach ₹ lakh crore
in the financial year of 2022.  Earn about ₹
94000 crores, spend about ₹ 27000
crores. If we calculate, the government should spend 33000 crores
more money. This problem did
not arise just for a day, but this
problem has been going from bad to worse for many years. The situation
is so bad that the Punjabi government
One of its own reports said that the debt indicators of Punjab are
probably the worst in the entire country, due to
which Punjab is stuck in a dead trap.
20 years ago, Punjab
was the second richest state of our country. Today,
Punjab is ranked among the lowest states of the country.  It
was at number one for consecutive years but today it is
stuck in a swamp of debt.
Punjab is buried under a debt of about ₹ lakh crores. It
was not always like this and
Punjab is going down in this swamp and do not
think that  This does not affect the common people.
More than 80% of Punjabi farmers are in debt
because the Punjabi government has taken so much debt.
They are not able to invest in infrastructure.
Very famous industrialist
Pawan Munjal, who is the chairman of Hero Group,
and many other Punjabi industrialists.
Instead of Punjab, they are investing in Uttar Pradesh.
Due to the bad industrial environment of Punjab, now the question is
that how did Punjab come into this situation
and who is responsible for this?
During which party and which government, Punjab has
seen the maximum loss.  This is what I
want to tell you in this video and
I have used four reports to
understand the financial situation of Punjab properly.
These reports were published by RBI,
PRS Legislative Research CAG and the last
report is by Punjab Government's own
department.  All these
reports of Finance are linked below
[Music]
Just remember one thing that if you
get value from this video then definitely subscribe
so that you keep watching such analytical videos
and I also
get motivation. Out of all these reports, it is most important.  The
report of the Department of Finance of the Government of Punjab which they published
in June 2022,
3 months after the formation of the Aam Aadmi Party government because the Department
of Finance wanted to explain the present situation to the new government. There
are some people among my viewers who will say that  Mohak,
you are supporting this party, you are
supporting Aam Aadmi Party, you are supporting
Congress, you are supporting BJP.
I am a big fan of Vikas Divya
Kirti Sir and he says every time that
keep emotions aside.  Let us argue on facts,
so let's keep emotions aside and
focus on the argument and I
would request you to do the same. This is my
attempt to focus on state issues. Recently
I made a video on unemployment in Haryana
and on Sikkim that the government there
Why are you paying money to have a child?
If you want to request about an issue in your state
then
tell me by commenting. Now let's move
ahead. This is the scene from Sri Lanka. When
people took over the Presidential Palace of Sri Lanka.
Economic Crisis.  Let's go, a
crowd of protesters
entered the official residence of President Rajpaksha demanding his resignation. The echoes of this crisis did
not reach most of the Indians but
fortunately these echoes definitely reached some people of our country.
These people were the Reserve Bank
of India.  Officials of the Government of India who did the risk analysis of
many Indian states after the Sri Lankan crisis
and in their analysis they
found that Punjab is in the risk position in our country
because
by 2026 its debt ratio will become the highest in our country. The
main reason behind the Sri Lankan crisis.  The reason was that the government there was
spending more than what it was earning.
Sri Lanka is struggling to pay its debts, has signed a huge
port deal with China and the
same thing is happening in Punjab. Now
to check what is the condition of Punjab.  We will
analyze at four levels. The first level will be to
see
what the broad indicators are saying about Punjab. The
second analysis will go one level down
to understand the revenue and expenditure of Punjab. The third analysis will
go to your history of Punjab to check that.  For
how did we reach here and the fourth analysis will be of the Aam
Aadmi Party government,
what did they do about this crisis after coming to power.
If we look at the statistics, the
problem is clear, Punjab is a debt ridden
state, like I told you, the country.
Punjab has the highest debt ratio in India. Debt
ratio can be measured in many ways. A
common way is to take the debt of any state
and take the GDP. GDP is of countries. The
GDP of a state is called GSDP.
Gross State Domestic Product is called debt
ratio.  To reach this, you have to divide the debt
by the GSDP and this ratio of Punjab is
one of the highest in our country.
Why are the debt levels so high because they are
spending more than earning?
Where does the Punjab government take the loan? Simply put.
So this problem does not end with loans from the open market and
from the Central Government. The
problem is that
a large part of the loan that Punjab is taking goes to
repay the previous loan. It is
not that the Government of Punjab is planning long term
infrastructure projects.  Out of the
loans taken from 2017 to 2022, the
government has gone to repay 59 to 73 of the previous loans.
KR Lakhanpal, who
was the former Chief Secretary of Punjab, said
that due to the failure of the financial bankers of the state, the
entire state  The economy of the country is declining
because
a large part of whatever the state is earning is going to repay the debt,
hence no government is able to invest properly. Let us
understand this in more depth. There are
two types of expenditure of any government.
Revenue and Capital
Revenue Expenditure include those
expenses which have to be
spent regularly to run the government like salaries,
pensions, interest grants and subsidies and
Capital Expenditure includes those expenses which
go in making capital like roads and
infrastructure. Now it is not that  Revenue
expenditure is useless.
Due to revenue expenditure, the government is able to do its work,
water, food and health
services reach the people, but the
impact of revenue expenditure
lasts only for one year. To generate this impact,
you have to spend every year.  This will have to be revenue
expenditure, whereas capital
expenditure is a different story.
You will not see the result of capital expenditure immediately,
it comes after two-three years, but
you can see its impact for many years.
In 2021, Punjab
Government has announced its plan on Bus 8.  The expenditure
was on capital expenditure. We
can compare this 8 per cent with other Indian states
which are growing very fast and you
will see that in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra
and Gujarat, the percentage of capital expenditure
is between 11 to 18 per cent, while Punjab
Infrastructure  It is not spending so much money in construction,
that is why many
industrialists are not happy with the government. DS
Chawla is the President of United Cycles and Parts
Manufacturers Association.
He says that importers do
not want to come to the industrial areas of Punjab
because our air connectivity is so good.
No, on the contrary, they call us to Delhi or any
other city. We
can see the same problem from one more thing, there is an indicator called
Development Expenditure. This expenditure
includes those expenses of the state which are
related to health, education, labour, irrigation, nutrition and transport.
Unfortunately, Punjab is very backward in this matter
in our country. Less than half of
Punjab's budget is spent on such developmental things.
Unfortunately, this problem is getting
worse. For quite some time, the
Department of Finance of Punjab has
shown in its report that  Whereas in the last 15 years, the
annual growth of revenue of Punjab has been at 10.8, the
annual growth of expenditure has
been at 11.5, now you
will see the difference in revenue and expenditure, it
is not so bad in comparison to other states, the
only problem is
that  Punjab is spending more than it is earning. The
problem is that Punjab has too
much debt and because of that it is
stuck in the cycle of debt and there
is no sign of getting out of this cycle. Now coming
to the second level that Punjab  To understand that the government
is spending through taxes,
we have to understand all these documents properly.
We can divide the revenue of any state into two parts. The
first one is called own revenue. This is the
revenue which the state itself earns.  Earns others and is
called transfer form. This is the
revenue which the Central Government
transfers to the state. Own revenue also has
two parts, tax revenue and non-tax revenue.
State comes in tax revenue, GST, VAT, excise duty and non-
tax revenue.  Income from license
or profit from state company
also comes in two parts. Central government transfers also have two
parts. The first part is that the central government
earns tax money, some part of which is
given to every state. The second part is aid
or donation.  The share
which the Central Government can give to any state is the
lion's share of the Central Government's taxes. It was
decided by the 15th Finance Commission.
Like the 15th Finance Commission had said that
41% of the taxes of the Central Government will be
given to the states. Now which of this 41% will be given to the states
?  How much the state will get is
decided by a formula like
in this formula what is the population of the state,
what is the area, how much forest cover is there,
etc. Punjab gets 1.79 out of this 41,
so now you understand that the revenue of a state.
Own tax revenue
can come from non-tax revenue or
share of taxes from the center or aid from the center.
A state can earn from four things.
One of the main problems of Punjab is that the state's
revenue has been dependent on the central government
for the last 10 years.  The
tax revenue of Punjab has increased by
about 9.9% between 2006 and 2021.
During this period, the non-tax revenue has increased by only 1.2% at an annual growth rate of Rs. 1000.
Sand mining in Punjab is a very good
way for the government to earn non-tax
revenue. The Department of
Finance of the government also accepts this and they have
shown in their report that Punjab  There has been
mismanagement in the mining sector. There is
a lot of corruption in this segment too. The troubles
of former Punjab Chief Minister Charan Singh Channi are
increasing.
In the alleged illegal sand mining case of 2018, the Enforcement
Directorate interrogated Channi for several hours
because these contracts  These are given to those
who have connections
with political parties. The same thing happens
in the transport and trucking business of Punjab.
Apart from this, the private players
in this mining business have
formed their own cartel where they
bid at least in the government contracts.  If we
try to do this by setting up with each other,
then in 15 years the tax avenue has increased by
9.9, non-tax has increased by 1.2% and the
money coming from the center has increased by 16. But the
dependence on the central government is increasing and there
is another danger in this.  When the Central Government
implemented GST, many
manufacturing states were very afraid
that their tax revenue would be reduced,
hence the Central Government said
that if you are not able to collect GST as per the rules
then we will stop you for 5 years.
Will give compensator, this happened with Punjab,
they could not collect as much as they should, due to which the
Central Government has been
compensator to them for 5 years but this
deadline is about to end and the Department
of Finance is afraid that this revenue
of Punjab.  It will be reduced. He wrote in his report
that the previous governments did
not even make any attempt to increase the revenue of the state. Now
this was the matter of revenue. You know
that there are two things in the equation. Let us come
to the expenditure and the main problem, we have already
discussed it.  It has been said that most of the expenditure is going
not on building capital but on running the government.
In the financial year of 2021-22, 27 rupees are spent on salaries, 14 rupees on
retirement and pension, 17 rupees on interest
payments, 13 rupees on power subsidy, 17 rupees on
other expenditure and only  Around 8% is being spent on
capital expenditure and around 58% is being
spent on salaries, pensions and interest payments. These three things are called
committed expenditure. This is the
expenditure for which the
Punjab government has committed. Once I have committed
and Salman Khan  Just like it becomes
almost impossible not to complete this expenditure,
now let us see
how Punjab was spending money in 2006
and what is the situation in 2021. This is the
annual growth rate of every expenditure, you
can clearly see that.  The expenditure on power subsidy has grown the fastest in 15 years. In
fact, on 999, the money that goes for subsidy
from the Punjab government
goes only for power subsidy. The total amount that the government has to spend every year
for power subsidy
is  20000 crores which
includes domestic consumers, farmers and industries. In fact, according to CAG's analysis,
Punjab
spends the most money after Gujarat among the 19 states.
Now you will say why I am
not criticizing Gujarat. Is there
any problem in giving subsidies?  No, but
giving subsidies when you have debt and revenue is
not coming is the problem. Because of these subsidies,
many times the state companies of the government do
not get money. In fact, in 2023,
54 government departments will pay their
electricity bills worth Rs. 000 crore.
Now we have understood the numbers, but to
understand what is the story behind these numbers, we will have to go into the history of Punjab
[Music]
In 1960, the Punjabi economy was
running at full speed because Punjab was the
second richest in India.  There was a state, one reason behind it
was the Green Revolution
[Music]
In the Green Revolution, high yielding
varieties of beech were used, fertilizers were used,
pesticides were introduced and irrigation news
started coming which increased the productivity of wheat and paddy.
In 1960, there was a food shortage in the country.  There
was a thing for which our country had to
depend on other countries but this
dependence was reduced by Punjab.
Punjab developed due to the development of agriculture. As Punjab developed,
agriculture increased further. For
example, Punjab became the first state where weather
proof roads were built and as if
Electricity reached every village. Due to roads, farmers could
easily take their produce to the market
and due to electricity, they could use tube wells
to water their fields.
Before the Green Revolution, Punjab was
so dependent on paddy and wheat.  Instead, pulses,
cotton, vegetables and maize were grown there,
which did not require so much water and fertilizers. The
history of Punjab
supported the Punjabi farmers. In the 19th and 20th centuries, the
British had developed a canal irrigation system,
which the farmers used in
their  To provide water to the fields, but
after the Green Revolution, the need for water
increased, for which farmers needed
tube wells and electric pumps. This Green
Revolution was first implemented
in wheat today, but because success was seen in wheat, the
same thing happened again.  This was done with paddy
but the problem was that paddy
required more water than wheat. Another
problem came, pesticides were used so much
that even the paste became resistant to these chemicals and hence the
yield started decreasing. These
farmers were afraid of chemicals and water.
Due to which pollution increased and gradually the
ground water levels also started decreasing. At one
time, farmers used to grow many types of crops but
now the cycle has come to wheat and
paddy because there is only one type of crop.  The
fertility of the soil also started decreasing. The
agricultural growth rate which had once
touched the sky became only 4.74. The income of the farmers
decreased and the expenditure on electricity
started stinging. Then many farmers formed the Bharatiya
Kisan Union (BKU) which challenged the government.
They sought help from BKU, their only objective was to
reduce our electricity prices. In 1983, the
Congress government knew that our
revenue was low, so we would have to increase the electricity rates,
but BKU protested,
after which the Congress government agreed.  There were
pending electricity bills, they were also
postponed and the government even
said that now we will charge a flat rate on electricity
no matter how much electricity the farmers use. The
farmers may have definitely got short term relief
but the problem of Punjab has not been solved.
And now the situation in Punjab
was about to worsen. The main reason for this was
political
violence.
Due to this violence, a
President's rule was imposed from 1987 to 1992. Due to militancy,
economic needs were forgotten. Many
economists said that the government should
increase the price of electricity.  It would happen, but considering the political situation, no
government had the
courage to do this. In 1990,
Punjab's GDP became less than India's national average
and there was a competition in the elections
as to who would give more subsidies. A
2002 report said  He said that the state elections of 1990 were
fought only on subsidies. Let
me give you an example of this. In 1997,
state elections were about to come. The
coalition of BJP and Akali Dal thought what should we do to
win these elections. They said
why not we farmers.  Give free electricity to the people
and they did the same. The economic
situation started deteriorating. At one time the World
Bank said that they will
not give money to any project in Punjab and do not
think that anyone is washed with milk here
in this Ganga.  Hands are dirty:
After becoming the Chief Minister in 2002, Captain Amarinder Singh
imposed a price of ₹ per horse power on agricultural motors but after 3 years
he stopped this thing saying that the
opposition is giving free electricity so
how can I not  To win the elections, at that
time, many states like Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka were going towards industry,
Punjab's focus was only on agriculture.
Between 2005 and 2011, Punjab's ease of doing
business ranking changed from sixth position to 12th
position.
Contribution on average in India is 18.3,
contribution in Punjab is 29, so the
economy is very dependent on agriculture and
earning money from agriculture becomes
very difficult for any government. The first thing is
that there is no income tax on agricultural income. The
second problem is  That
money can definitely be earned in other ways from agriculture.
Indirect Taxes:
GST is levied on the agricultural inputs. You
can impose excise duty on some products, you can collect land revenue taxes,
but agriculture is such a sector
in our country.  If there are no proper records and
documents then it becomes difficult to impose taxes.
Another problem is that
most of the farmers are small and [
music] are
unofficial. The governments of Punjab have
focused very well on the social sector, so there
is potential in the population of Punjab like
Punjab has the lowest poverty rate in the country where
its poverty rate is just 4.75.
Punjab's performance in child nutrition is also
better than other states. The same thing is about
unemployment. Niti Aayog makes the ranking of
all Indian states on SDG i.e. Sustainable Development Goals.
This ranking is
They consider 100 different things to create
and even in this ranking, Punjab's
score is much better than the Indian average, so
we cannot raise so many questions on today's social sector spending.
Questions are being raised
on the social sector of the future whether  The
ranking of Punjab should not be less than the Indian average. Most of the
statistics we
saw were till 2022. After 2022, something has happened to
Punjab. So, what has the Aam Aadmi Party government done?
Look at both the revenue and expenditure. If you do not know, then
it is the biggest.  The promise that Aam Aadmi Party had
made was that the Aam Aadmi Party
government in Punjab will provide free electricity up to 300 units to every family. If a
hint is enough for the wise,
then you must have understood that the situation of power subsidy will get
worse before 2021.  Bus
Schedule Caste Below Poverty Line and
some other families were given free electricity of
200 units but Aam Aadmi Party said
that everyone in Punjab will be given 300 units free. The
implementation of this scheme was also done in a very
interesting manner. Electricity in Punjab  The
bill comes every two months.
300 units in one month
became 600 units in two months. Now if the bill for
610 units comes for Scheduled Caste and BPL families,
then they will have to pay only 10 units.
600 units will be waived off.  If you
are from general category and your bill is Rs 610, then
you will have to pay the entire bill only on 10 units of Rs 610. There is
no subsidy for you.
What is this,
then what is the logic if
subsidy has to be given to general category, not 300 units per month.
Give two 150 units because this
increases the possibility of cheating.
Most of the applications are made by the person who
gave nine meters, that is, he gave a house with a double meter, the person with double
meter is installing double meter, which
means first he installed one meter.  Families are
applying for double meter to avail the benefit of the unit and
thought why don't we
install 2 meters in our house so that we do
n't have to pay the bill and this is what happened in Punjab
when the scheme was launched, there were 74.5
lakh domestic households in Punjab.  There were power consumers but
Punjab State Power Corporation Limited
said that this number has increased to 77.4 6 lakh
because many people have made double connections.
What is the total result? The government has to
spend an extra Rs 1500 to 18800 crore for this.
Power  In subsidy, the government has
also said that it will probably
implement the Old Pension Scheme for the government employees,
which will increase their expenses further,
but the government has definitely taken some steps
to reduce the spending, like
they have given Rs 1500 to the farmers every year.
If they will use Direct Sowing of Rice or
DSR technique
for growing paddy, it will save water.
Apart from this, they have taken the decision to announce MSP on Moong Dal so
that
farmers will go towards Moong Dal instead of paddy and wheat.
But these steps will not show any immediate results,
we will see the results only after a few years,
which shows us what the problem is that if
we increase the expenditure, we
can reduce it in a pinch but it
may take years to reduce, but this is only half the picture
because  If we talk about expenditure, it
comes in revenue. It is possible that the
government may have increased the expenditure and
increased the revenue more than that, but
this is what the Aam Aadmi Party says. They say
that the previous governments were all corrupt, hence we will
not bring any new tax.  Will
improve tax collection so that tax
revenue increases. In the first year, Aam Aadmi
Party government definitely increased the revenue by 20%
because they increased the excise revenue by
40% by 21.4. They say that
they have destroyed the liquor mafia
due to which their excise revenue has
increased.  They have also increased the GST collections by 16.6%
but since excise
is a non-tax revenue and GST is transferred
from the Centre, there is no change in the own tax revenue. The
government also claims
that they are eliminating the sand mafia
which will bring in more money.  But
no result is visible yet. Overall, if you
say, the expenditure of the Punjab government
has increased and the revenue has
decreased. The solution to the economic problems of Punjab is
not a secret. Power
subsidy will have to be reduced and this will happen when the farmers are able to produce
rice.  And instead of wheat, we will focus on other crops.
Apart from this, the government will have to
focus not only on agriculture but also on industries and services sector.
I am the first person with a news recommendation.
25 years ago also, agricultural
economist SS Jhol had given a similar recommendation.
People believe that Aam Aadmi
Party probably has only 2 years left
for any serious reforms because by the time of elections,
competition for subsidies will come back.
Punjab has been digging its own pit for many years
and this pit has a special feature.  The
money for this excavation will have to be paid to someone or the other.
In any economy, there is a contract between
today's population and the future population,
so the present and the future have to decide
who will bear this expense, today's
population or the future population.  The
population of Punjab is educated, healthy and there is
not as much poverty as seen in other states.
In our country,
Punjab needs such a government which will pay attention
not only to the needs of today but
also to the needs of the future. Aam Aadmi Party has given
this  If not, then only one of his election
promises will be left. That promise was that the government will
run Volvo buses to connect Punjab and Delhi
airports. The only
difference will be that these buses
will become a one-way ticket. Due to this, the Punjabi youth will
leave Punjab permanently.  If
you liked this state video then you
can also watch these videos. This video is
about unemployment in Haryana and this video
is about why money is being given in Sikkim
for the birth of children and if you
want that  If I make a video on your state issue
then comment with the state and issue.